<!-- @format -->

**Authors:** Eligio Maure, Blessing Kamwi

(chapter4)=

# Working with Map Projections in Python

## Overview

The representation of a portion of the Earth on a two dimensional planar surface
leads to distortion of one form or another that often requires some
transformation of the round surface to a plane denoted projection
{cite}`Snyder1987,Snyder1989,Usery2009`. Simply put, a map projection is a
systematic representation of all or part of the surface of a round body, like
the Earth, on a plane. This representation often includes lines that delineate
meridians and parallels, depending on the definitions of a map projection
{cite}`Snyder1989`. To perform operations with geographic data, such as overlays
or accurate spatial/temporal analysis, a common coordinate framework is
required; map projections introduce transformations that allow the creation of
such common frameworks. The techniques involved in these transformations use
some kind of a coordinate system. Geodesy is the mathematical treatment of these
transformations. Together with geodesy, map projections allow the representation
and visualisation of the transformed spherical or ellipsoidal form of the
Earthâ€™s surface to a two dimensional representation.

This chapter gives a brief outlook of map projections, the associated
transformations between different projections and the advantages and limitations
of working with different projections. We will briefly discuss a few important
concepts associated with geodesy and coordinate systems prior to the discussion
of map projections. As discussed in {numref}`chapter2`, Cartopy is the common
package used in Python to work with imagery that requires a map projection.
Matplotlib provides the visualisation capability.

## Learning Outcomes

- Gain familiarity with cartographic transformations
- Gain ability to visualise satellite scenes on a map
- Gain ability to convert a given map projection to another based on the use
  case

## How to Proceed

This chapter assumes familiarity with materials of {ref}`chapter2`.
